# Introduction

One of the popular uses of the Dynamic Link Exchange Protocol (DLEP) 
[](#RFC8175) is to improve the association time of routing protocol
peers. When a DLEP Destination Up Message is received by a router, routing
protocol instances can be informed of potential peers, enhancing or avoiding the
use of timed Hello messages, speeding up the convergence of nodes. In practice
this behaviour has many benefits, but does also have a downside: When a new
potential peer is announced via DLEP, every routing protocol active on the
receiver attempts to communicate with the potential peer trying to
form a neighbour association, with no prior indication if the destination router
supports the routing protocol. Particularly in a heterogeneous network when the
capabilities of different routers is not known in advance, as links form between
routers each new router may be bombarded by requests to form a routing adjacency
from every protocol implementation active on every other reachable router in the
network.

This document defines an extension to DLEP that introduces a new Data Item to
allow a router to announce to its DLEP session peer, during Session
Initialization, the set of services that it supports, such as the running
routing protocols. A modem supporting this extension can transmit this
information over the air using whatever internal protocol it uses for signalling
to all connected modems. Every other modem can then attach the received set of
services to the DLEP Destination Up Message that it then sends to its DLEP
session peer router. Any changes to the set of services can also be sent via the
Session Update Message, resulting in a corresponding DLEP Destination Update
Message.

This service announcement can be used to advertise the availability of more
than just routing protocols. Other protocols that need peers for their
operation, such as peer-to-peer messaging applications, or discovering the
presence of matching protocol compression proxies, can also use the same
mechanism.

##  Requirements

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and 
"OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in BCP 
14, RFC 2119 [](#RFC2119).


# Assumptions

As an extension to DLEP, this document assumes any implementation of this
extension correctly implements the core DLEP specification defined in 
[](#RFC8175). No other DLEP extensions are required.

This extension also assumes that supporting modems have the facility to
transmit the set of services described by an attached router to other modems
in the network.

# Service Descriptors  {#service_desc}

Services active on a router are described using Service Descriptors, that are
modelled on DNS SRV records [](#RFC2782), but with some important differences. A
Service Descriptor is a string that describes the name of the service, the IP
protocol used by the service, optionally the name of the service instance, and
optionally the port number used by the service if not the registered default
port.

The format of a Service Descriptor string is defined as:

     Service.Protocol.Name:Port
    
Service: 
:    The symbolic name of the desired service, as defined in Assigned Numbers 
     [](#RFC1700) or locally. The maximum length of a Service is 15 characters.
     The Service is case insensitive.

Protocol:
:    The symbolic name of the desired protocol. 'tcp' and 'udp' are at present
     the most useful values for this field, though any name defined by Assigned
     Numbers or locally may be used (as for Service). The Protocol is case
     insensitive.
     
Name: 
:    OPTIONAL. The Name of the instance of the service active at the
     destination. Unlike DNS SRV records, this name MAY not be a DNS name, but
     it MUST use the DNS name syntax. The Name is case insensitive.
     
Port: 
:    OPTIONAL. The port on router of this service. The range is 1-65535. This
     field SHOULD only be specified if the port differs from the value specified
     in Assigned Numbers.
     
As mentioned above, the Name field in a service descriptor MUST follow the DNS
name syntax, but MAY not be a DNS name, as DLEP is often deployed in
environments where DNS is not available. However, the Name field still serves a
purpose as a descriminiator for different instances of a service and could be used
by a receiving router to make peering decisions.

When a service operates as an IP protocol, rather than TCP, UDP, SCTP or DCCP,
such as OSPF [](#RFC2328), the Protocol field MUST be specified as 'ip'.

## Service Descriptor ABNF

    service-descriptor = service-part "." protocol-part
                          [ "." name-part [ ":" alt-port ] ]
    
    service-part       = *( 1*DIGIT [ "-" ] ) ALPHA
                          *( [ "-" ] ALNUM )   ; Maximum 15 characters
    
    protocol-part      = "tcp" / "udp" / "sctp" / "dccp" / "ip"
    
    name-part          = label *( "." label )
    label              = ALNUM *( [ "-" ] ALNUM )
    
    alt-port           = %x31-39 *DIGIT         ; Values of 1-65535
    
    ALNUM              = ALPHA / DIGIT
    ALPHA              = %x41-5A / %x61-7A    ; A-Z / a-z [RFC5234]
    DIGIT              = %x30-39              ; 0-9       [RFC5234]

# Operation

To use this extension, as with all DLEP extensions, the extension MUST be
announced during DLEP session initialization. A router advertises support by
including the value 'Destination Service Announcement' (TBD1) in the Extension
Data Item within the Session Intitialization Message. A modem advertises support
by including the value 'Destination Service Announcement' (TBD1) in the
Extension Data Item within the Session Intitialization Response Message. If both
DLEP peers advertise support for this extension then the Data Items described in
this document MAY be used. If a modem does not announce support for this
extension, the router MUST NOT include any Data Items described in this document
in any DLEP Message.

If a router announces support for the 'Destination Service Announcement'
extension in the Session Initialization Message, it MAY incude one or more 
[IPv4 Destination Service Data Items](#v4_dca_di) 
and/or [IPv6 Destination Service Data Items] (#v6_dca_di) in the Session
Initialization Message, as a DLEP compliant modem implementation that does not
support this extension will correctly ignore the unknown.

## Service Description Information Base  {#sdib}

In order to describe the correct operation of this extension, a conceptual
service descriptor information base is described that contains the set of
service descriptors current announced by a router during a DLEP session. A modem
that supports this extension is described as maintaining a service descriptor
information base recording the set of service descriptors advertised by its
local router, ready to relay this information to any over-the-air peers that
support this extension with which it forms a link. An implementation is, of
course, free to choose alternative ways of providing compliant functionality.

When a modem receives a Session Initialization Message from its local router
containing an Extension Supported Data Item announcing its support for this
extension, and one or more Destination Service Data Items, it records this
service information in the service descriptor information base.

In order to retract a previously advertised service or announce the
availability of a new service, the router sends a new Session Update Message to
the modem containing a relevant Destination Service Data Item using the
Add/Remove flag to indicate the change.

When a modem receives a Session Update Message from its local router containing
one or more Destination Service Data Items, it updates the set of service
descriptors in its service descriptor information base.

## Over-the-air signalling

When a modem forms a new link with a remote modem, it sends the contents of the
service descriptor information base to the remote modem. How this information is
sent is an implementation detail that is out of scope of this document.

When a modem supporting this extension receives a set of service descriptors
from a remote modem, it SHOULD propogate this information to its DLEP peer router by
including one or more Destination Service Data Items in the associated
Destination Up Message.

When the service descriptor information base of a modem is updated, as a result
of a Session Update Message containing one or more Service Description Data
Items, it informs all currently connected remote modems of the change. Each
remote modem that receives such a notification SHOULD announce the change in remote
router services by sending a Destination Update Message to their attached router
containing one or more Destination Service Data Items describing the update in
services.

# DLEP Data Items for Destination Service Announcement

This extension introduces two new DLEP Data Items, described below. Both
Data Items carry information about destination services, one for IPv4, the other
for IPv6.

One or more instances of either or both Destination Service Data Items MAY
appear in the DLEP Session Initialization, Session Update, Destination Up, and
Destination Update Messages.

A router MAY use one or more instances of either or both Data Items in the DLEP
Session Initialization Message to advertise all services that are currently
available at the router, and a router MAY use one or more instances of either or
both Data Items in the DLEP Session Update Message to advertise a change in the
services that are currently available at the router.

A modem MAY include one or more instances of either or both Data Items in the
DLEP Destination Up and Destination Update Messages to inform its DLEP session
peer of the services available at a remote DLEP destination.

A router announcing services MUST NOT report the same combination of address
and service in more than one Data Item per Message. A modem that receives
multiple Data Items with the same address and service descriptor in a single
Message SHOULD treat this as an invalid Data Item in the Message, and react as
defined in the core DLEP specification.

A modem receiving a Destination Service Data Item with the Add/Remove flag
cleared (zero) retracts any previously announced service from its service
descriptor information base, and MUST inform all connected remote modems of the
change. If a retraction of a destination service does not match a previous
announcement, the implementation SHOULD treat this as an invalid Data Item and
react as defined in the core DLEP specification.

Destination Service Data Items MUST NOT be included in any DLEP Destination Message
referring to a multicast destination.

## IPv4 Destination Service Data Item  {#v4_dca_di}

The IPv4 Destination Service Data Item contains the following fields:

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Data Item Type                | Length                        |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Flags         |       IPv4 Address                            :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    :   (cont)...   |  Service Descriptor...                        :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    
Data Item Type:
:    TBD

Length: 
:    5 + the length of Service Descriptor in octets.

Flags:
:    Flags field, defined below.

IPv4 Address:
:    An IPv4 address used by the announced service.

Service Descriptor:
:    A string of characters, as defined in [](#service_desc).


The Flags field is defined as:

     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
   |   Reserved  |A|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    
A: 
:    Add/Remove flag, indicating whether this service is
     being announced as running (1), or whether a previously announced active
     service is being announced as no longer avaiable at the destination
     (0).
     
Reserved:
:    MUST be zero.  Reserved for future use. 

An implementation MUST NOT assume the Service Descriptor field is NUL-terminated.

## IPv6 Destination Service Data Item  {#v6_dca_di}

The IPv6 Destination Service Data Item contains the following fields:

     0                   1                   2                   3
     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Data Item Type                | Length                        |
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    | Flags         |               IPv6 Address                    :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |                        IPv6 Address                           :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    :                        IPv6 Address                           :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    :                        IPv6 Address                           :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    :                        IPv6 Address                           :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    :               |     Service Descriptor...                     :
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    
Data Item Type:
:    TBD

Length: 
:    17 + the length of Service Descriptor in octets.

Flags:
:    Flags field, defined below.
     
IPv6 Address:
:    An IPv6 address used by the announced service.

Service Descriptor:
:    A string of characters, as defined in [](#service_desc).


The Flags field is defined as:

     0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    |   Reserved  |A|
    +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
    
A: 
:    Add/Remove flag, indicating whether this service is
     being announced as running (1), or whether a previously announced active
     service is being announced as no longer avaiable at the destination
     (0).
     
Reserved:
:    MUST be zero.  Reserved for future use. 
     
An implementation MUST NOT assume the Service Descriptor field is NUL-terminated.

# Security Considerations

This extension introduces a mechanism for routers to announce their
services to other potential peers. In cases where an adversary can
manipulate the list of services, by either accessing the network segment
between router or modem, or by intercepting any signalling between modems, this
list of services may be altered if the link is not secured.

Therefore: 

* Any implementation MUST follow the security considerations defined in the
  core DLEP protocol.

* Any implementation, when used in an environment where the signalling between
  modems may be open to interception, MUST apply any relevant security
  considerations for the modem to modem signalling.

It should be also noted that a malicious router could attempt to deny service
to a network by rapidly and repeatedly announcing a varying set of services,
forcing the modems to flood the over the air signalling with updates. A modem
implementation MUST be aware of this risk and implement mitigations, such as
aggregating the changes and trottling the updates propogated between devices.


# IANA Considerations

This section specifies requests to IANA.

## Registrations

This specification defines two new Data Items for DLEP.
Assignments from the DLEP Data Item registry are requested for:

* IPv6 Destination Service
* IPv4 Destination Service

The specification also defined an extension to the DLEP protocol. An
assignment from the DLEP extension registry is requested for
'Destination Service Announcement'.

# Acknowledgements

Many thanks to Steve Loates, Stan Ratliff and Henning Rogge for their reviews and feedback.
